---
title: 'Static and dynamic aspects of non-invasive characterization and monitoring agricultural soils: assimilation with traditional probes and scale issues'
description: Serious threats to agricultural soil comprise soil erosion, decline in organic matter, local and diffuse contamination, sealing, compaction, decline in biodiversity, salinization, floods and landslides. One major prerequisite for the specific protection and/or restoration of soils is the availability of high-resolution soil property maps. Various soil parameters can be mapped using rapid, nearly non-destructive geophysical methods.
---

# Abstract

Serious threats to agricultural soil comprise soil erosion, decline in organic matter, local and diffuse contamination, sealing, compaction, decline in biodiversity, salinization, floods and landslides. One major prerequisite for the specific protection and/or restoration of soils is the availability of high-resolution soil property maps. Conventional, sample-based soil property mapping is very time-consuming, cost-intensive, and the data collected are available only for discrete points in a landscape, thus leading to interpolated maps that can be heavily distorted by spatial aliasing. Various soil parameters can be mapped using rapid, nearly non-destructive geophysical methods (Electromagnetic Induction - EMI; Ground Penetrating Radar - GPR; magnetic; seismics; gamma ray spectrometry). The key step to make a profitable use of geophysics to produce soil maps is that data be analysed quantitatively to offer meaningful information for the specific discipline object of investigation. A similar attempt to translate geophysical data into quantitative estimates of practical properties is currently made for many other applications, including environmental studies, hydrology and geotechnics. This approach leads to overcoming the classical view of geophysics as a pure imaging technique, and requires in-depth understanding of the information contained in each specific physical measurement. Irrespective of the specific application, the geophysical response of the near surface is essentially controlled by a combination of geological (“static”) and ambient (“dynamic”) factors. The latter include moisture content and temperature variations. In the case of soil mapping, the effect of ambient conditions is even more pronounced than for deeper applications, so time-lapse monitoring is essential to derive also soil static information (esp. texture). The separation of static and dynamic factors is the key step towards a quantitative use of near surface geophysics, as individual disciplines and applications may be interested selectively in one or more of the static or dynamic aspects, or combinations. Physical-mathematical modelling is often a fundamental tool that helps to discriminate between static and dynamic aspects, extracting the factors of specific interest for the application at hand. A link between measured geophysical quantities and the corresponding quantities of practical interest can only be established in the form of quantitative constitutive relationships. In this way proxies to the state variables of e.g. hydrological predictive models (typically, soil moisture content) can be estimated in space and time and used for model calibration over unprecedently large datasets. However, the translation of geophysical derived quantities (e.g. electrical resistivity) into soil state variables requires solid pedophysical laws, that in turn should be established also with local, traditional, in situ measurements (usually provided by probes installed in the ground). This is a challenging task, from which emerges the need for proper accounting of the measurement scales of geophysical versus local probes, as well as the need for a precise localization of the geophysical measurements themselves.
